Alzheimer Disease Diagnosis Prediction Using Machine Learning

Abstract— Alzheimer’s disease is a central global health issue with growing prevalence and high occurrence. In clinical settings, the early detection of AD and the prediction of its onset are crucial due to the chance to oppose the disorder and apply the intervention at the optimal time. The present paper describes the results of the analysis of various machine learning methods to the prediction of AD using multimodal data, including neuroimaging features, demographic data as well as cognitive scores. The gathered data were diverse ranging from the data of the affected to persons with mild cognitive impairment and even relatively healthy people, and it allowed a thorough investigation of the problem of diverse data. In order to make data compatible and able to train data, complex data preprocessing included data merging, imputing missing values, data-field encoding, and normalization. A random forest algorithm was then used as a machine learning method allowing training complex data to establish relations of the input multi-dimensional data and examine AD’s diagnosis in the studied cohort sample. Metrics, particularly accuracy, precision recall as well as F1-score, were then used to assess the model, and it showed a positive result for the current method and cohort sample with overall accuracy equal to 79.83%. An in-depth analysis of the confusions between the diagnoses of different disease stages was also conducted using the metrics of classification and confusion matrices, with the detected biomarker sets, the presence of which is indicative of the AD development or one of its stages. Thus, the work shows the possibilities and limitations of the proposed method, calling for better feature selection, model interpretability and generalization, and external validation of their clinical utility. Overall, such machine learning technologies as discussed in the work could be an effective tool for ensuring the early detection of the disease and the personalized qualification of individuals for the risk of developing the disease, which would be essential for the positive outcomes and the improved organization of healthcare-related patient flows for such neurodegenerative disorders as AD.
